---
layout: post
title: "Recitation #2: FFS"
---

Please read Fast File System ([PDF](http://ipads.se.sjtu.edu.cn/courses/cse/2013/Schedule_files/A%20Fast%20File%20System%20for%20UNIX-1.pdf)), and answer following questions:

- What is the problem this paper tried to solve? (Hint: please state the problem using data)
- What is the root cause of the problem? In one sentence.
- For each optimization, how does the author get the idea? (Hint: just imagine you’re the author. Given the problem, what experiment would you do to get more info?)
- For each optimization, does it always work? In which case it cannot work?
- Do you have some better ideas to implement a faster FS?

Some guidance of paper reading:

- First time: please scan the entire paper for the first time. Read the first sentence of each paragraph and try to understand the logic of the whole article.
- Second time: read the paper carefully. For each optimization, please use one sentence as summary. If you’re not familiar with the tech, just mark and skip it.
  - Why the old FS is not good enough?
  - Pay attention to “File System Parameterization”, you may need to read it many times.
  - For evaluation part, please ask yourself why the author test in this way, and what else do you think should be measured.
- Third time: go back and find all the mark places, using Google to find more about the them, try to understand in its context.
- Fourth time: selectively read parts of the paper with the questions in mind, and answer them.

The deadline of your answer and questions is **23:59, 2015-3-26**.