---
layout: post
title: "Hands-on #4: MapReduce"
---

Complete the following hands-on assignment. Do the activities described, and submit your solutions for following questions to

**ftp://kiki_yu:public@public.sjtu.edu.cn/upload/hands-on-4**

Please submit **two files:**

- a doc or a pdf with title like 513037xxxx.pdf. You are free to use either Chinese or English.
- your code with title like 513037xxxx.py.

Due time is **2015-4-18 23:59**.

This assignment asks you to write a simple parallel program with the [MapReduce](/assets/src/mapreduce.py) library using a single-machine python implementation. Before attempting this hands-on, you should study about the MapReduce library from [this paper](/assets/doc/mapreduce-osdi04). Please skim the first three sections and scan section 3.1.

This assignment involves programming.

With any problems, contact Yu Qianqian(kiki_yu@foxmail.com).

## I. Warmup

Download the program [mapreduce.py](/assets/src/mapreduce.py) and store it in a file mapreduce.py. Download [an ASCII bible](/assets/doc/kjv12.txt) and save it in kjv12.txt. Then, run:

```
$ python mapreduce.py kjv12.txt
```

After running for a little while, the output should be as follows:

```
and 12846
i 8854
god 4114
israel 2574
the 1843
for 1743
but 1558
then 1374
lord 1071
o 1066
david 1064
jesus 978
moses 847
judah 816
jerusalem 814
he 754
now 643
so 622
egypt 611
behold 596
```
The output has two columns: the first column has a lower-case version of a **title-cased** word that appears in the ASCII bible and the second column has a count of the number of times that word appears in the bible. The output is trimmed to only display the top 20 results sorted by descending word count.

**Exercise:** Edit a small input file and check what the output is.



## II. Studying mapreduce.py

We will now study mapreduce.py. The program begins execution after the following statement:

```
if __name__ == '__main__':
```

We then create an instance of the WordCount class using a few parameters. The last parameter comes from the command line. In our example, it is "kjv12.txt". This parameter controls which file we will be executing MapReduce on. Immediately after initialization, we call run on the WordCount instance. When we call run on our WordCount instance, the Python MapReduce library runs the MapReduce algorithm using the map and reduce methods defined in the WordCount class.

You may find the [Python Reference](http://docs.python.org/2/reference/) useful in answering the following questions. In particular, the sections on [Multiprocessing](http://docs.python.org/2/library/multiprocessing.html) and [Process Pools](http://docs.python.org/2/library/multiprocessing.html#module-multiprocessing.pool) may be useful.

**Question 1:** What do the first two parameters to WordCount's `__init__` method control?

**Question 2:** Briefly explain how calling run triggers calls to both the `map` and `reduce` methods of the WordCount instance.

**For the following questions, do not assume that the name of the parameters correspond to their function!**

**Question 3:** What do the parameters `keyvalue` and `value` of the `map` method in WordCount represent?

**Question 4:** What do the parameters `key` and `keyvalues` of the `reduce` method in WordCount represent?

**HINT:**

**- Read the comments before answering the questions.**

**- Try your small input file and add some "print" statements in mapreduce.py.**



## III. Modifying mapreduce.py

Modify the program so that you can answer the following questions:

**Question 5:** How many invocations are there to `doMap` and how many to `doReduce`? Why?

**Question 6:** Which invocations run in parallel? (Assuming there are enough cores.)

**Question 7:** How much input (in number of bytes) does a single `doMap` process?

**Question 8:** How much input (in number of keys) does a single `doReduce` process?

**Question 9:** For which parameters of `maptask` and `reducetask` do you see speedup? Why do you observe no speedup for some parameters? (You might see no speedup at all on a busy machine or a machine with a single core.)



## IV. Reverse word index

Extend the program with a ReverseIndex class. The Map function should produce for `each` word in the input a pair (`word, offset`), where offset is the byte offset in the input file. The Reduce function should output (`word, [offset, offset, ...]`), sorted by descending alphabetic order of word. This should require few lines of code (~25); if you find yourself writing much more code, you might be on the wrong track; ask for help to double check that you have the right plan.

**HINT:** While developing ReverseIndex, you want to use a small input file for which you know what the right answer is, so that you can quickly iterate to the correct solution. Study the map and reduce function of WordCount before start.

Once you have a correct implementation, run it on the bible and look at the bottom 20 results. Your output should be as follows:

```
ReverseIndex:
zuzims [49087]
zurishaddai [577584, 587049, 622586, 623298, 641744]
zuriel [595730]
zur [720749, 749459, 1012737, 1797952, 1804417]
zuph [1198019, 1231015, 1784743]
zuar [577689, 585972, 620325, 621028, 641248]
zorobabel [3723452, 3723476, 3981669]
zorites [1769359]
zoreah [1022483]
zorathites [1772251]
zorah [1040397, 1135679, 1139831, 1154226, 1156947, 1158198, 1158772, 1932649]
zophim [712064]
zophar [2204691, 2226195, 2248403, 2310058]
zophai [1783770]
zophah [1795155, 1795225]
zoheth [1774656]
zoheleth [1473058]
zohar [85769, 99609, 209556, 254104]
zobebah [1772854]
zobah [1261785, 1381034, 1381413, 1382623, 1466277, 1545341, 1545451, 1839356, 1839745, 1840423, 1843127]
```

**Question 10:** Include the code for your ReverseIndex class in your submission. 
